<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Characters</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Characters</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Peter Ignátitch. A well-to-do peasant, fourty-two years old, married for the second time, and sickly</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Anísya. His wife, thirty-two years old, fond of dress</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Akoulína. Peter’s daughter by his first marriage, sixteen years old, hard of hearing, mentally undeveloped</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Nan (Anna Petróvna). His daughter by his second marriage, ten years old</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Nikíta. Their labourer, twenty-five years old, fond of dress</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Akím. Nikíta’s father, fifty years old, a plain-looking, God-fearing peasant</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Matryóna. His wife and Nikíta’s mother, fifty years old</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Marína. An orphan girl, twenty-two years old</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Martha. Peter’s sister</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Mítritch. An old labourer, ex-soldier</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Simon. Marína’s husband</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Bridegroom. Engaged to Akoulína</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Iván. His father</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A neighbour</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>First girl</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Second girl</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Police officer</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Driver</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Best man</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Matchmaker</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Village elder</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Visitors, women, girls, and people come to see the wedding</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr>⁠—The “oven” mentioned is the usual large, brick, Russian baking-oven. The top of it outside is flat, so that more than one person can lie on it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
